<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Gaulois-pipe Config File</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <h2>Config File</h2>
        <p>This section explains how a gaulois-pipe config file must be, and how it is
            interpreted.</p>
        <h3>Namespace</h3>
        <p>The whole config file is in </p><pre>http://efl.fr/chaine/saxon-pipe/config</pre>
        <p>There is no element or attributes outside of this namespace.</p>
        <h3>Sample file</h3>
        <div class="source">
            <pre>&lt;config xmlns="http://efl.fr/chaine/saxon-pipe/config"
    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    xsi:schemaLocation="http://efl.fr/chaine/saxon-pipe/config
                        ../../../src/main/resources/fr/efl/chaine/xslt/schemas/saxon-pipe_config.xsd"&gt;
    &lt;pipe mutiThreadMaxSourceSize="24349456" nbThreads="4" traceOutput="logs/trace.log">
        &lt;xslt href="./src/test/resources/step1.xsl">
            &lt;param name="p-step1" value="step1"/>
        &lt;/xslt>
        &lt;tee>
            &lt;pipe1>
                &lt;xslt href="./src/test/resources/step2.xsl" traceActive="true">
                    &lt;param name="p-step2" value="step2"/>
                &lt;/xslt>
                &lt;output id="step1">
                    &lt;folder relative="./target/generated-test-files" to="${user.dir}"/>
                    &lt;fileName name="step1-output.xml"/>
                &lt;/output>
            &lt;/pipe1>
            &lt;pipe2>
                &lt;tee>
                    &lt;pipe1>
                        &lt;xslt href="./src/test/resources/step3.xsl">
                            &lt;param name="p-step3" value="step3"/>
                        &lt;/xslt>
                        &lt;output id="step3">
                            &lt;folder relative="./target/generated-test-files" to="${user.dir}"/>
                            &lt;fileName name="step3-output.xml"/>
                        &lt;/output>
                    &lt;/pipe1>
                    &lt;pipe2>
                        &lt;output id="step2">
                            &lt;folder relative="./target/generated-test-files" to="${user.dir}"/>
                            &lt;fileName name="step2-output.xml"/>
                        &lt;/output>
                    &lt;/pipe2>
                &lt;/tee>
            &lt;/pipe2>
        &lt;/tee>
    &lt;/pipe>
    &lt;params>
        &lt;param name="p-general" value="GENERAL"/>
    &lt;/params>
    &lt;sources>
        &lt;folder href="./src/test/resources" pattern="source.*xml"/>
    &lt;/sources>
&lt;/config></pre>
        </div>
        <p>Under <span class="code">&lt;config&gt;</span> element, we may have :</p>
        <ul>
            <li>A <span class="code"><a href="#pipe">pipe</a></span></li>
            <li>A <span class="code"><a href="#params">params</a></span></li>
            <li>A <span class="code"><a href="#sources">sources</a></span></li>
        </ul>
        <h3><a id="pipe"></a>pipe</h3>
        <h4>Attributes</h4>
        <table>
            <thead>
                <tr>
                    <th>Attribute</th>
                    <th>Required ?</th>
                    <th>Value</th>
                    <th>Value if omitted</th>
                </tr>
            </thead>
            <tbody>
                <tr>
                    <td>nbThreads</td>
                    <td>No</td>
                    <td>positive integer</td>
                    <td>1</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>mutiThreadMaxSourceSize</td>
                    <td>No</td>
                    <td>file size in bytes</td>
                    <td>10485760 (10Mb)</td>
                </tr>
                <tr>
                    <td>traceOutput</td>
                    <td>No</td>
                    <td>The location where to store traces. valid values are :<ul><li>#logger to use default logger of gaulois-pipe, i.e. the log4j logger</li><li><tt>#standard</tt> to use default Saxon logger, as defined in Saxon configuration</li><li>any absolute or relative writable URL.</li></ul></td>
                    <td>None</td>
                </tr>
            </tbody>
        </table>

        <h4>Elements</h4>
        <p>The pipe <strong>must</strong> start with a <a href="#xslt"><span class="code"
                    >xslt</span></a>. Then, it may have <a href="#xslt"><span class="code"
                    >xslt</span></a>, <a href="#java"><span class="code">java</span></a>. A pipe is
            terminated with either a <a href="#tee"><span class="code">tee</span></a> or a<a
                href="#output"><span class="code">output</span></a>.</p>
        <p><strong>Nothing can</strong> follow an <a href="#output"><span class="code"
                >output</span></a> ; output is always a terminal node.</p>

        <h5><a id="xslt"></a>xslt</h5>
        <p>A <span class="code">&lt;xslt&gt;</span> is a step where transformation is made by a XSL
            transformation. <span class="code">@href</span> specifies the XSL location ; it may be
            an absolute URL or a relative URL. Relative URL are relative to <span class="code"
                >System.getProperty(&quot;user.dir&quot;)</span>. <span
                style="text-decoration: underline;">This will change in a future minor
                release</span>.</p>
        <p>There is no restriction on XSL you use, except the Saxon Release you use must be
            compliant with your XSL. You may want to change the Saxon Release you use with
            Gaulois-pipe : create your own maven project, add a dependency to gaulois-pipe, and add
            exception on <span style="font-family: 'Courier New', monospace;"
                >net.sf.saxon:Saxon-HE</span> ; do not forget to add your own Saxon dependency, and
            the license, if required.</p>
        <p>You can add a <tt>traceActive="true"</tt> attribute, to allow traces generated by <a href="https://www.w3.org/TR/xpath-functions-30/#func-trace">fn:trace()</a> XPath function to be stored. If used, <tt>ancestor::pipe/@traceOutput</tt> must be present.</p>
        <p>You can set the <tt>debug="true"</tt> attribute - you must define the <tt>@id</tt> attribute in this case - the result of the Xslt will be written in the current directoy, in a name called <tt>id-$[input-name]</tt>.</p>
        <p>A <span class="code">&lt;xsl&gt;</span> may have parameters defined as <span class="code"
                    ><a href="#param">param</a></span> sub-elements.</p>

        <h5><a id="java"></a>java</h5>
        <p>A <span class="code">&lt;java&gt;</span> step is a class that may filter or transform the
            events send by Saxon processor. A Java Step must extends <a
                href="apidocs/fr/efl/chaine/xslt/StepJava.html">fr.efl.chaine.xslt.StepJava</a>.</p>
        <p>When used into a &lt;pipe&gt;, a java step must not be a terminal step or a initial step,
            and so its <a
                href="apidocs/fr/efl/chaine/xslt/StepJava.html#getNextReceiver(net.sf.saxon.Configuration)"
                >getNextReceiver</a> method must not return null.<br />
            <a href="apidocs/fr/efl/chaine/xslt/utils/FileAppenderStep.html">FileAppenderStep</a> is
            such a step sample you can use.</p>
        <p>When used in a <a href="#source">&lt;source&gt;</a>, the step is either an initial step
            and a terminal step, and so underlying <span class="code"><a
                    href="http://www.saxonica.com/html/documentation/javadoc/net/sf/saxon/event/Receiver.html"
                    >Receiver</a></span> must not be a <a
                href="http://www.saxonica.com/html/documentation/javadoc/net/sf/saxon/event/ProxyReceiver.html"
                >ProxyReceiver</a>. <a
                href="apidocs/fr/efl/chaine/xslt/utils/FileAppenderTerminalStep.html"
                >FileAppenderTerminalStep</a> is such a step sample you can use.</p>
        <p>A <span class="code">&lt;java&gt;</span> may have parameters defined as <span
                class="code"><a href="#param">param</a></span> sub-elements.</p>

        <h5><a id="choose"/>choose</h5>
        <p>A choose allows you to control the structure of the pipe, depending on XPath expression evaluations. It's very similar to XSL 
            syntax, except that otherwise is required. A choose must always "return" a sub-pipe.</p>
        <pre>
            &lt;xslt href="cp:/pre-process.xsl"/>
            &lt;choose>
                &lt;when test="/mydoc/meta/@pubYear/xs:integer(.) lt 2000">
                    &lt;xslt href="cp:/very-old-fashion.xsl"/>
                &lt;/when>
                &lt;when test="/mydoc/meta/@pubYear/xs:integer(.) lt 2000">
                    &lt;xslt href="cp:/old-fashion.xsl"/>
                &lt;/when>
                &lt;otherwise>
                    &lt;xsl href="cp:/current.xsl"/>
                &lt;/otherwise>
            &lt;/choose>
            &lt;output id="main">...&lt;/output>
        </pre>
        <p>The XPath expressions are evaluated on the input document, and are not evaluated on the result document of the previous step.</p>

        <h5><a id="tee"></a>tee</h5>
        <p>A <span class="code">&lt;tee&gt;</span> allows to fork the pipe to two or plus other
            destinations, each destination terminated by an <a href="output">output</a>. 
            You must provide a <span class="code">pipe[2,...]</span> sub-pipes.</p>
        <p><strong>Warning: </strong> there is no backward compatibility from previous releases, where you used
            <span class="code">pipe1</span> and <span class="code">pipe2</span> childs.</p>

        <h5><a id="output"></a>output</h5>
        <p>An <span class="code">&lt;output&gt;</span> is used to define where the pipe result have
            to be written. An <span class="code">&lt;output&gt;</span> is defined by a <a
                href="#outputFolder">folder</a> and a <a href="#fileName">fileName</a>, or is a null output, 
            and contains only a <a href="#nullOutput">null</a>. It may
            define as attributes all the saxon-supported output properties. See <a
                href="http://www.saxonica.com/html/documentation/javadoc/net/sf/saxon/lib/SaxonOutputKeys.html"
                >SaxonOutputKeys</a>.</p>
        <h6><a id="nullOutput"></a>null</h6>
        <p><span class="code">&lt;null /&gt;</span> defines that output is lost and must not be written. When using null, all other elements
        or forbidden.</p>
        <h6><a id="outputFolder"></a>folder</h6>
        <p><span class="code">&lt;folder&gt;</span> defines the folder where to write output files.
            It can be a relative reference, or an absolute URI. If <span class="code"
                >relative</span> attribute is defined (it must be a relative URI), then the <span
                class="code">to</span> attribute must be also defined. You can use parameters
            values, with the <span class="code">$[param]</span> syntax, and also use System
            properties, with the <span class="code">${system.property}</span> syntax.</p>
        <h6><a id="fileName"></a>fileName</h6>
        <p><span class="code">&lt;fileName&gt;</span> allows to define a rule to calculate the
            target file name. The rule is to concatenate a <span class="code">prefix</span>, a <span
                class="code">name</span>, and a <span class="code">suffix</span>. The name attribute
            is required, prefix and suffix are optionals. You can use parameters values, system
            properties, with the appropriate escape syntax, and three special properties are
            available, with the system property escape syntax :</p>
        <ul>
            <li><span class="code">name</span>: the original source file name</li>
            <li><span class="code">basename</span>: the original source file name, without
                extension</li>
            <li><span class="code">extension</span>: the original source file extension</li>
        </ul>
        <h3><a id="params"></a>params</h3>
        <p><span class="code>">&lt;params&gt;</span> are used to define parameters that are given at
            all XSL and Java steps. Defined here, they are global parameters. They may be
            overwritten by command-line parameters.</p>
        <p>Once a param is defined, you can use it everywhere, with this escape syntax : <span
                class="code">$[paramName]</span></p>
        <p>Few predefined parameters may be used everywhere in the pipe :</p>
        <ul>
            <li><span class="code">$[input-name]</span> : the input file name actually processed</li>
            <li><span class="code">$[input-basename]</span> : the input file basename (without extension) actually processed</li>
            <li><span class="code">$[input-extension]</span> : the input file name extension actually processed</li>
        </ul>
        <h3><a id="sources"></a>sources</h3>
        <p><span class="code">&lt;sources&gt;</span> allows to define which files are to be
            processed by the pipeline. </p>
        <p>Files may be specified one by one, via the <a href="#file">file</a> element, by folder,
            via the <a href="#folder">element</a>, or a HTTP listener can be started to listen to
            files to process, when you don't know which files to process when you start
            gaulois-pipe.</p>
        <h5><a id="file"></a>file</h5>
        <p><span class="code">&lt;file&gt;</span> specifies only one file, via an absolute URI on
            the <span class="code">href</span> attribute. You may use elsewhere-defined parameters
            in the URI. You may add parameters inside ; those parameters will be passed to XSL and
            Java steps when processing this file.</p>
        <h5><a id="folder"></a>folder</h5>
        <p><span class="code">&lt;folder&gt;</span> allows to select many files in a folder. Specify
            the folder absolute URI in the <span class="code">href</span> attribute, specify to
            recuse or not in the <span class="code">recurse</span> attribute, and specify the
            pattern to match files in the <span class="code">pattern</span> attribute. You can only
            specify one pattern per folder, but you may specify the same folder URI many times. You
            may use elsewhere-defined parameters in the URI. You may add parameters inside ; those
            parameters will be passed to XSL and Java steps when processing this file.</p>
        <h5><a id="listener"></a>listener</h5>
        <p>A listener allows to start gaulois-pipe as a waiting http server. You specify the <span
                class="code">port</span> (default is 8888), the keyword that must be used to stop
            the server.</p>
        <p>When definig a listener in gaulois-pipe, gaulois-pipe does not stop when all files
            defined with <a href="#file">file</a> or <a href="#folder">folder</a> ; gaulois-pipe
            keep working until he receives a <span class="code">DELETE</span> http request, with a
            keyword parameter ; keyword parameter value must be the one defined in the <span
                class="code">keyword</span> attribute.</p>
        <div class="source"><pre>http://localhost:8888/?keyword=STOP [DELETE http method]</pre></div>
        <p>To add files, send a http PUT request, defining a <span class="code">url</span> parameter
            that contains the absolute url of the file to process. It <strong>must</strong> be an
            URL on the <strong>file:</strong> protocol. If you have parameters to pass to steps,
            define all the additional parameters you need.</p>
        <div class="source"
            ><pre>http://localhost:8888/?url=file%3A%2Fhome%2Fcmarchand%2Fdata%2Fcollection.xml&amp;ciType=actu [PUT http method]</pre></div>
        <p>When the DELETE request is received, and if it is valid, the server does not accepts
            anymore files, the http server stops, and gaulois-pipe stops when all input files have
            been processed.</p>
    </body>
</html>
